let's go back to 2011 Silly Bandz were
an epidemic that was comparable to the
vaping crisis seen in modern high
schools I don't like this makes me throw
up the best and most desired movie
sequel of our generation was about to
drop and boy oh boy was it a good one
but most importantly this was the year
when minecraft was absolutely huge
everywhere in the world people worldwide
were obsessed with the game that would
revolutionize the gaming industry and
make notch worth 1.5 billion dollars it
was a complete craze and everyone wanted
to take advantage of minecraft
popularity we had releases like castle
miner Z terraria block fortress in a
crazy amount of other various block
based mining and crafting games but none
of them would compare to a simple little
game known as Ace of Spades or in other
words minecraft with guns
I'm eeen everything needs to be compared
to Minecraft right we have this game
where it's totally like Minecraft if
minecraft creepy hissing spiders were
bloodthirsty savages trying to eat you
then we have Minecraft but with more
focus on farming minecraft but with more
focused on starving and minecraft
fallout 4 seriously GamesRadar you're
telling me that fallout 4 is base
building feature boast all of the
hallmarks of classic minecraft gameplay
ok anyways minecraft with guns would
turn out to receive a lot of positive
praise and people absolutely loved it in
fact it received nearly 2 million unique
users people loved it so much that jagex
caught wind of it and decided to become
involved with it the same jag axe that's
behind a cute little game known as
runescape and the huge worldwide
breakout hit called transformers
universe so when it was heard that that
would be taking over development of an
indie game made by a single developer it
was a pretty big deal but something went
wrong along the way and the game would
end up shutting down on April 3rd 2018
there were a lot of problems and by the
time that the game closed fans were not
happy with Jagex and the entire
situation so what exactly is the
situation and why did a game with
millions of active users closed down is
there any hope for the future of Ace of
Spades we're gonna talk about these
things and more in today's video why Ace
of Spades died you know what else has
died my channel's ability to get
sponsors because I don't ever upload so
this video is sponsored by me yeah I'm
now using this as self promo time I've
been trying to be trendy late
and play minecraft because I'm just like
every other youtuber but while I've been
doing this I've actually realized how
much fun it's been so I decided to
launch my very own minecraft server for
people who watch my channel to play on
it's a step back from all the corporate
$10,000,000 hub servers with 30
minigames and tons of pay to win donor
items that are thrown in your face every
five seconds instead it's a classic
minecraft survival feel with a twist
that keeps it more interesting on this
server you can join a guild rank up
build a community work by yourself or
with others and most importantly enjoy
Minecraft and play it the way it's
supposed to be played if you guys are
interested I through the discord for the
server in the description along with the
IPS so feel free to join and I hope to
see you guys there now back to the video
the story of Ace of Spades begins in
April of 2011 when a small developer
known as bin aksoy releases a prototype
to an exciting new game known as ace of
spades the first playable version was
beta version 0.1 and it was definitely a
very basic and simple game without much
to do in fact this is one of the first
videos found on the internet showing off
gameplay of the game and as you can tell
it doesn't really look like much but
this is one of those situations that
proved that graphics aren't everything
and even though it isn't the prettiest
thing in the world it still is a great
concept with near perfect execution even
with the limited graphics simple HUD and
basic looking gameplay there was
actually quite a bit that stood out with
Ace of Spades
even in its early phases the terrain was
entirely destructible which allowed
teams of up to 16 players to edit the
terrain and create bunkers and buildings
to protect them while they were in
battle against each other the teams
competed in a game mode that was very
similar to capture the flag where the
goal was to capture a briefcase full of
Intel and return it back to their team's
HQ there was even full physics in these
early stages where if you for example
knock down all of the pillars of a
bridge the entire bridge would crumble
to the ground
it was definitely impressive but there
was even more to it the gunplay was
actually pretty advanced and it was a
lot more realistic than you would think
for example a headshot would be an
instant kill but a body shot would leave
much more room for return fire because
of this there was a solid combination of
risk in action if you weren't careful
you would be completely obliterated by a
stray bullet but if you wanted to rush
someone an attempt to spray them well
you could do that as well
there were also obviously grenades and
when these grenades were thrown they
created little craters on the map making
it feel more and more like a battlefield
as time progressed you could go around
and see half built buildings and
destroyed bunkers and it gave the world
a dark eerie feeling even with the
cheerful visuals and quirky little
characters in the game in the early
stages of beta the reception for Ace of
Spades was quite good it was an entirely
unique concept and people seemed excited
to follow the development of it at this
point the website was pretty minimal
there was no list of controls and
players couldn't even change their name
or edit any aspect of their experience I
mean there is even a player made graphic
to teach other players how to play the
game because it didn't even show you
what you were supposed to do in the
beginning it was pretty simple with the
only endgame items being a rifle
grenades a shovel and a pickaxe the
first big mechanic change would come in
beta version 0.5 4 when the developers
added a submachine gun as the first new
weapon in the game this was a game
changing item and it showed players some
of the potential of what could be done
with an ace of spades
a few updates later in version 0.58
there was another new weapon added and
this time it was a shotgun during this
time there was also a lot of changes
related to performance and organization
and the game started to feel much more
official and professional and it was
obvious that it could really go
somewhere it even appeared on Kotaku's
list of best indie games of 2011 but
were these additions actually good for
the overall feeling that the game gave
off there's not really a definite answer
to that one the thing that really stood
out about Ace of Spades in the early
days was the fact that it had a unique
feel it felt like a one-of-a-kind trench
warfare based game the combat was brutal
and there was a lot of strategy when it
came to how you played it took skill you
had to land your rifle shots perfectly
to get the jump on an opponent and work
towards securing their briefcase you
were digging through mountains and
navigating around destroyed bases and
craters all while avoiding the powerful
shots from the enemy team and while
these new updates were cool and added a
lot of new content to the game many of
the older players didn't really like
them that much the machine gun in
particular added much more of a
run-and-gun feel to the game and it kind
of threw off the entire balance that
made ace of spades so great but it was
still the beta and there was still a lot
more that could be done so not too many
people complained about
overall keep in mind that during this
time Ace of Spades was completely free
to play there were no microtransactions
paywalls or anything that made it to
where players had to pay money to enjoy
the features this had a big impact on
the popularity of the game and it was
also a big factor when it comes to the
reason behind the game's growth by the
end of the beta in late 2012 there were
over 2.5 million players who registered
and played the game but with this many
people registering and playing the game
it started to catch the attention of
some bigger name publishers in
particular jag acts the creators of
runescape at some point throughout the
development process and during the phase
where the game was receiving a lot of
hype Jagex became involved and bought
out the original developer and
mastermind behind Ace of Spades this was
a move that raised a lot of questions
with players of the game who had been
involved from the start
these players stood behind the product
that been actually I created and many of
them questioned what would happen with
the future of Ace of Spades
what Jagex be able to turn this around
or would they continue on a path that
would make ace of spades completely
different from what it originally
promised Jack X's Ace of Spades was
announced on November 1st 2012 and had a
super dope launch trailer as stated by
the jagex CEO David Solari if you're
tired of the same old first-person
shooters coming out year after year with
a fresh lick of paint and a hefty price
tag Ace of Spades will take all the
boxes for you the reception of what was
seen in the trailer was not the greatest
and while some people had hope many did
not
but regardless over 500,000 people pre
registered for this exciting new game
one month later in December of 2012 Ace
of Spades had officially launched on
Steam for all players the people who
remained hopeful that Ace of Spades
would keep the same vibe going were
pretty disappointed at launch the game
had a price of $9.99 which is $9.99
higher than what it should have been
instead of the simplified all-out war
mentality the game now had four classes
each with unique perks there were also
six game modes including demolition VIP
occupation multi Hill team deathmatch
and zombie mode remember the statement
mentioned earlier about the CEO being
tired of similar FPS games with a new
coat of paint yeah apparently nobody had
Jagex remembered that he said that the
development team took the game and did
exactly what they said they weren't
going to
they took the super simplistic concept
and made it into a blocky battlefield
clone with the ability to dig tunnels
and the worst part is that even with
these changes it wasn't looked at as a
good game in fact the game received a
score of 49 on Metacritic with review
stating the same thing that players
complained about the game was no longer
a strategy and building based war game
it was now a run-and-gun FPS and while
this on its own isn't necessarily a bad
thing it was a thing that was completely
unnecessary and pointless
Jagex is version of Ace of Spades was
not a bad game on its own but it was
completely different from what it was
advertised as and what the community
knew the original game as at this point
much of the Ace of Spades community was
furious and they were not a fan of the
state of the game many of them quit and
many stopped supporting Jagex as a
company the player base quickly dwindled
and by January of 2013 things were not
looking good at this time jagex had
already known that they messed up they
had an interview on January 8th 2013
with game ax sutra and which they openly
talked about how they messed up with a
few key factors of Ace of Spades in this
interview Rob kender the brand director
of Ace of Spades talks about a few of
the issues that caused the game to be
the way that it was first of all he
mentions how Jagex kept their
involvement in ace of spades under the
table for way too long and stead of
receiving feedback from the community
the community obviously wanted
everything to be a certain way and jagex
completely ignored that and did what
they wanted to do anyways then kender
talks about how the game lacked the
ability to use community created mods
and maps and how that also helped to
hinder the gameplay experience for the
community basically jagex took a game
with a strong and vocal community and
told them to be quiet and that they had
no say a quote that really stands out to
me in this article was when kinder says
we need to make sure that we don't lose
sight of what made this game so popular
in the first place this quote is pretty
ironic because it shows that Jagex
didn't really even know what made the
game so popular in the first place
because their version never even had
those things it seems as if they merely
saw the ability to make a quick buck and
didn't realize what it was that made the
game so special but the company did sort
of I guess try to fix these mistakes and
it could have worked on January 24th
2013 they released a classic game mode
that
to bring back the feeling of the early
days of Ace of Spades this was good
because it was a step in the right
direction and a lot of players began to
have a sliver of hope again but that
hope was lost when right after this in
February they released a paid DLC known
as the st. Valentine's Day Massacre DLC
the fact that this wasn't free
absolutely infuriated the entirety of
the remaining fanbase and more players
began to leave over the course of 2013
there were a few more updates that came
out but nothing really substantial the
remaining players continued to leave and
all that was left was the shell of
something that was once truly amazing by
the end of the year servers were
completely empty players were no longer
active and the community crumbled away
and began to hate Jagex even more but
Jagex didn't really care they made their
money and that was all that mattered
this is pretty much proven when right
after the demise of Ace of Spades
Jagex began working on a new title known
as block and load a title that would
inevitably meet the same fate as Ace of
Spades and lower Jagex his reputation
even further and while it's definitely a
shame that something with so much
potential can fail to deliver there's
still hope for longtime fans of Ace of
Spades
as with other games that have been
covered on this channel there are a few
community projects that go on to
recreate the experience for modern
players there's open spades which is a
clone of ace of spade 0.75 and then
there's also build and shoot both of
which will be linked in the description
below did you guys ever play Ace of
Spades tell me what it was like in the
comments thank you guys so much for
watching the video
be sure to check out my minecraft server
to have some fun with the community and
subscribe if you want to see more I'll
see you guys next time and peace